# SoKSI - Self-Organized Kinetic Stochastic Interaction
## Research in modeling Power Laws

### Overview
A exploratory model investigating the critical dynamics prevalent in complex systems, focusing on the depiction of the cascading events that lead to critical transitions.

This model has been developed to investigate the critical dynamics prevalent in complex systems. This model, named the Self-Organized Kinetic Stochastic Interaction model, extends traditional cellular automata by incorporating non-deterministic rule sets for state transitions, which are governed by interactions among elements—specifically grains—during avalanche events. The model integrates stochasticity through a power-law-distributed function, enhancing the system's heterogeneity, And simulates the kinetic energy and the consequent momentum transfer in collisions, a method not typically observed in cellular automata frameworks.

## Setup / Use
###
Clone / Download zip file of this repository and navigate to the project folder.

### Pre-requisites 
Install Rust [https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install)
Optional: Python environment with installed [Python powerlaw library](https://pypi.org/project/powerlaw/) for creating visualizations using the provided script in [data/](data/)

### Configure SoKSI parameters
Open the [src/util/constants.rs file](src/util/constants.rs) and configure the parameters

### Test Run 
```
cargo run
```

## Results 

All of the results generated by the model are output in a folder created for each run within the [data/](data/) folder. The folders are generated with the format YYY-MM-DD_HH-MM-SS-gs-#TOTAL_GRAINS-ps-X_SIZE-Y_SIZE-Z_SIZE where TOTAL_GRAINS, X_SIZE, Y_SIZE and Z_SIZE are parameters within [src/util/constants.rs file](src/util/constants.rs). 

With in the folder you will find the following files:
 - avalanche-movement-stats.csv   : Statistic on the number of avalanches containing a total movement of n gains
 - avalanche-total-magnitude.csv  : Statistic on number of avalanches with n magnitude (movement * number of grains)
 - display-all-locations.txt      : Final breakdown of grains at all locations export
 - display-pile.txt               : Provides a visualization of the pile at the end of the run
 - gain-stats.csv                 : Statistic on the number avalanches containing n grains
 - py-powerlaw-import.txt         : Movement statistic formatted for input to [Powerlaw Analysis](analysis/powerlaw-analysis.py)
 - run-configuration.txt          : Output of all relevant parameters from [Parameter Configuration](src/util/constants.rs) 

### Data
There are some example runs output in the [Data Folder](data/) 

### Visualization 
There is a basic python script located in the [Analysis Folder](analysis/) that can be configured per user requirements to generate visualizations using the [Python powerlaw library](https://pypi.org/project/powerlaw/). The [run-configuration.txt](data/) in the runs output is formatted for input. 

## Building

If desired, you can build Rust-template yourself. You will need a working `Rust` and `Cargo` setup. [Rustup](https://rustup.rs/) is the simplest way to set this up on either Windows, Mac or Linux.

Once the prerequisites have been installed, compilation on your native platform is as simple as running the following in a terminal:

```
cargo build --release
```

## Contribution

Found a problem or have a suggestion? Feel free to open an issue.

## License

Rust-template itself is licensed under the [BSD 3-Clause License](LICENSE) and includes this as the default project license.